File Formats
=======
This is a brief overview of the various file formats in the game, with some information derived from Bioware's Neverwinter Nights documentation where indicated. Please refer to the individual pages for a given format for more detailed information.

[2DA](pages/formats-2da.md)
---------
A 2DA is a spreadsheet, used to store data for all aspects of the game. A representative example is appearance.2da, which defines all of the NPC and creature appearances - which models and textures are used under what circumstances, as well as things like walk speed and distance, etc.

Archives/Containers
---------
There are two main archive formats used:

[BIF + KEY](pages/formats-bif.md)
_Bioware File Format Docs:_

BioWare's games and tools make use of a very large number of files that are packed into a group of files having the .bif extension. The contents of the .bif files are described by one or more files having the .key extension

[ERF](pages/formats-erf.md)
_Bioware File Format Docs:_

The Encapsulated Resource File (ERF) format is one of BioWare's methods of packing multiple files into a single file so that they may be treated as a single unit. In this regard, it is similar to .zip, .tar, or .rar. 

See also [MOD](pages/formats-mod.md), [RIM](pages/formats-rim.md), and [SAV](pages/formats-sav.md).

[BIK](pages/formats-bik.md)
---------
Proprietary video format developed by RAD Game Tools, used for playing movie clips in video games on both PCs and console systems. Allows standard video to be highly compressed while optimizing video quality for the target platform.

[GFF](pages/formats-gff.md)
---------
_Bioware File Format Docs:_

The Generic File Format (GFF) is an all-purpose generic format used to store data in BioWare games. It is designed to make it easy to add or remove fields and data structures while still maintaining backward and forward compatibility in reading old or new versions of a file format.

The following file types within a module are all in GFF:
* Module info file (ifo)
* Area-related files: area file (are), game object instances and dynamic area properties (git), game instance comments (gic)
* Object Blueprints: creature (utc), door (utd), encounter (ute), item (uti), placeable (utp), sound (uts), store (utm), trigger (utt), waypoint (utw)
* Conversation files (dlg)
* Journal file (jrl)
* Faction file (fac)
* Palette file (itp)
* Plot Wizard files: plot instance/plot manager file (ptm), plot wizard blueprint (ptt)
* Character/creature file (bic)

Layouts ([LYT](pages/formats-lyt.md))
---------
A plain text file that defines a room layout for a module. Used in conjunction with a VIS file.

[LIP](pages/formats-lip.md)
---------
A binary file that defines character lip sync animations for a VO track with the same filename. It's unknown how the original LIP files were generated by Bioware/Obsidian, but new LIPs can be created with the CSLU Tookit and LipSync Editor.

Models ([MDL/MDX](pages/formats-mdl_mdx.md))
---------
Models in Odysessy are stored as a pair or triplet of binary files (depending on the presence of a walkmesh).

MDL
The MDL contains the mesh data for a model.

MDX
The MDX conatins ancillary data for a model such as the skeletion/rig info, animations, etc.

Walkmesh ([WOK / PWK / DWK](pages/formats-wok_pwk_dwk.md))
Defines collision and walkable/non-walkable areas for level geometry (WOK), placeables (PWK), and doors (DWK).

Scripts ([NCS/NSS](pages/formats-ncs_nss.md))
---------
NWScript is the scripting language used to control behavior of objects, items, NPCs and other aspects of modules within the game. It is a language specific to the Aurora family of Bioware engines (Aurora, Odyssey, Eclipse, Lycium).

NWScript is based upon the C programming language and contains most of the C language syntax. NWScript does not support arrays, nor the Standard C library, such as printing to the screen, file I/O, nor system calls.

NSS
A plain text source file which can be compiled into byte code (NCS) that the engine can execute.

NCS
A binary file generated from script source (NSS) that the Odyssey engine can execute.

[Textures](pages/formats-textures.md)
---------
DDS (Direct Draw Surface)
A DDS file is a [DXT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S3_Texture_Compression) raster image saved in the DirectDraw Surface (DDS) container. It can store compressed and uncompressed pixel formats and is often used for texturing video game unit models. The DDS format accepted by Odyssey is a non-standard one created by Bioware for the Aurora engine. It should be considered a legacy format and not used, since it offers no advantages over TPC.

TGA (Targa)
TGA refers to a raster graphics file format created by Truevision Inc. This format had been used as the native format for TARGA and VISTA graphic cards for IBM PC’s to support Truecolor display. While the engine supports direct use of TGAs, they are typically only used for uncompressed images, such as lightmaps (although in TSL this was changed to uncompressed TPCs).

TPC/TXB
Images in the game are stored in the .TPC (named .TXB in the Xbox version) format, which is another non-standard container made by Bioware for DXT data. It also includes additional plain text rendering information embedded at the end of the file (see TXI).

TXI
A plain text file with information for how to render an associated texture with the same name. If used with a TPC file, the embedded rendering information will be overridden.

[TLK](pages/formats-tlk.md)
---------
_Bioware File Format Docs:_

BioWare's games are released in multiple languages, so it is necessary for game text to be different depending on the language of the user.

The talk table file, called dialog.tlk (and dialogf.tlk, containing feminine strings for certain languages), contains all the strings that the game will display to the user and which therefore need to be translated. Keeping all user-visible strings in the talk table makes it easier to produce multiple language versions of the game, because all the other game data files (with the exception of voice-over sound files) can remain the same between all language versions of the game. Using the talk table also has the advantage of reducing the amount of disk space required to store the game, since text for only one language is included.

Visibility ([VIS](pages/formats-vis.md))
---------
The VIS is a plain text file that defines which rooms within a module layout are visible to one another. Used in conjunction with a LYT.
